{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff1\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f16\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f17\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f19\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f21\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f28\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f29\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f31\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}
{\f32\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f33\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\f1\fs18\lang2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footnote text;}{\*\cs16 
\additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext17 MyList;}{\s18\li1134\ri1785\widctlpar\tx3686\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 MyGames;}{
\s19\li851\widctlpar\tx3119\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Problem;}{\*\cs20 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{\s21\widctlpar\adjustright \f2\fs20\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext21 Plain Text;}}{\info{\author Smeg Head}
{\operator David Kinder}{\creatim\yr1996\mo7\dy25\hr12\min57}{\revtim\yr2002\mo5\dy4\hr21\min27}{\version57}{\edmins25}{\nofpages8}{\nofwords1299}{\nofchars7405}{\*\company Jupiter Mining Corporation}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern89}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind1\viewscale100 \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ History}}}{ }{\cs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ History}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ History}}}{ History
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\b v3.0}{\tab Implemented support for line-drawn graphics.
\par \tab Fixed a problem with v4 detection that stopped some versions of Scapeghost running correctly.
\par \tab Implemented an opcode used by the disk based versions of Time and Magick, which now means that saving from these games works.
\par \tab The interpreter now gives you a reasonable amount of time to enter the Lenslok code in protected games, and also tells you what the code should be.
\par }{\b 
\par v2.0}{\tab Revised the description of v4 games to include all the post-1987 games, which are now supported.
\par \tab v2 games are also now supported.
\par \tab Added meta commands.
\par 
\par }{\b v1.0}{\tab First release.
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ The Interactive Fiction Archive}}}{ }{
\cs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ IFArchive}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ The Interactive Fiction Archive}}}{
 The Interactive Fiction Archive
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par If you have access to the Internet and are interested in text adventures, then you can find all sorts of programs and information at The Interactive Fiction Archive, at the ftp site
\par 
\par }{\f2 \tab }{\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst {\f2  HYPERLINK ftp://ftp.gmd.de/if-archive/ }{\f2\fs20 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000001d0000006600740070003a002f002f006600740070002e0067006d0064002e00640065002f00690066002d0061007200630068006900760065002f000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b3a0000006600740070003a002f002f006600740070002e00
67006d0064002e00640065002f00690066002d0061007200630068006900760065002f0000000064000000540100000100000400000000000000001e00000000000000010000020000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs20\f2\ul\cf2 ftp://ftp.ifarchive.org/if-archive/}}}{\f2 
\par }{
\par The latest version of this program can always be found here.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Credits}}}{ }{\cs16\super #{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ Credits}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Credits}}}{ Credits
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par The Level9 interpreter was originally written by Glen Summers. The changes for 3.0 were made by David Kinder (d.kinder@btinternet.com) with additional code from Alan Staniforth and Simon Baldwin
. Help, testing and information on the various Level 9 formats was provided by Paul David Doherty.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Introduction}}}{ }{\cs16\super #{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ Introduction}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Introduction}}}{ Introduction
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par During the 1980s a small British company called Level 9, run by two brothers (Mike and Pete Austin), produced a series of text adventure games for a variety of computers.
 These games received considerable critical acclaim and are probably the best text adventures written for the small cassette based 8 bit computers common in Britain in the 80s.
\par 
\par Level 9 wrote their games using a custom designed system known as "A-Code", wh
ich evolved from games on the 8 bit computers such as the Acorn BBC Model B, the Sinclair Spectrum and the Commodore 64 to the (then new) 16 bit machines such as the Amiga and the Atari ST.
\par 
\par From disassembly of Level 9 games there are thought to be four va
riants of A-Code, which are detailed below. Thanks go to Paul David Doherty for analysing the games and producing the table which follows. At present this interpreter supports v2, v3 and v4 games.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\b v1}{\tab This was used for the earliest games. Spectrum v1 games had black text on a grey background. Games known to be released in this format:
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s18\li1134\ri1785\widctlpar\tx3686\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {Colossal Adventure
\par Adventure Quest
\par Dungeon Adventure
\par Snowball
\par Lords of Time
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\b v2}{\tab \tab These releases were made between 1984 and 1985 (and usually say so in the initial copyright m
essage). This version introduced the yellow text on a black background which became standard. Games in this format were:
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s18\li1134\ri1785\widctlpar\tx3686\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {Adventure Quest
\par Dungeon Adventure
\par Lords of Time
\par Snowball
\par Return to Eden
\par Erik the Viking
\par Emerald Isle
\par Red Moon\tab \tab 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\b v3}{\tab This format, dated 1986, was used by the largest number of releases. These were:
\par }\pard\plain \ri1076\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s18\li1134\ri935\widctlpar\tx3686\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {Worm in Paradise
\par The Price of Magick
\par The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole
\par The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole
\par The Archers
\par The Jewels of Darkness Trilogy (Colossal Adventure, Adventure Quest and Dungeon Adventure released as one package)
\par The Silicon Dreams Trilogy (Snowball, Return to Eden and Worm in Paradise)
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\b v4}{\tab This was used for the Time and Magick Trilogy (Lords of Time, Red Moon and The Price of Magick), and all Level 9's new games from 1987 onwards:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\li1134\ri1785\widctlpar\tx3686\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {Knight Orc
\par Gnome Ranger
\par Ingrid's Back
\par Lancelot
\par Scapeghost
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-567\li709\ri509\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Level 9 Interpreter}}}{ }{\cs16\super #
{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ Contents}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Contents}}}{ Level 9 Interpreter
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par Level 9 Interpreter v3.0
\par An interpreter for Level 9 games in any format, including Spectrum snapshots.
\par 
\par Copyright (c) 1996 Glen Summers
\par Copyright (c) 2002 Glen Summers and David Kinder
\par 
\par Level9 is released under the terms of the GNU General Public License. See the file COPYING that is included with this program for details.
\par 
\par }\pard \li567\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs22\uldb Introduction}{\v\fs22 Introduction}{\fs22 
\par }{\fs22\uldb Supported Formats}{\v\fs22 SupportedFormats}{\fs22 
\par }{\fs22\uldb Graphics}{\v\fs22 Graphics}{\fs22 
\par }{\fs22\uldb Meta Commands and Menus}{\v\fs22 Menus}{\fs22 
\par }{\fs22\uldb History}{\v\fs22 History}{\fs22\uldb 
\par Credits}{\v\fs22 Credits}{\fs22 
\par }{\fs22\uldb The Interactive Fiction Archive}{\v\fs22 IFArchive}{\fs22 
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Meta Commands and Menus}}}{ }{\cs16\super #
{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ Menus}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Meta Commands and Menus}}}{ Meta Commands and Menus
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par Level9 supports several meta commands, which can be entered on the input line. These commands are handled by the interpreter rather than being passed to the game. They are:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\fi-1418\li1418\ri509\widctlpar\tx-2268\tx1418\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {#save\tab Saves out a game position directly, bypassing any prompting (such as for disk changes).
\par }\pard \s17\fi-1418\li1418\ri509\widctlpar\tx1418\adjustright {
\par #restore\tab Loads in a saved position directly, bypassing any protection code within the game.
\par }\pard \s17\fi-1418\li1418\ri509\widctlpar\tx-2127\tx1418\adjustright {
\par #quit\tab \tab Quits the current game.
\par 
\par #cheat\tab Tries to bypass the copy protection code which asks for a specific word. This is done by trying every word in the game's dictionary. On a slow machine, this can take a long time.
\par 
\par #dictionary\tab Lists the game dictionary. Press a key to stop the listing and return to the input line. Note that the v2 dictionary appears to have random characters following on the end: The original in
terpreter code to detect the end of dictionary does not appear to agree with the characters actually at the end.
\par 
\par }\pard \s17\fi-1418\li1418\ri509\widctlpar\tx-2410\tx-2127\tx1418\adjustright {#picture\tab If graphics are available, shows the picture specified as a number after the picture command, e.g. "#picture 520".
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par The following menus are also available:
\par 
\par Load Level 9 Game File...
\par Starts playing the specified Level 9 game
\par 
\par Restore Saved Position...
\par Restores a previously saved position, the same as entering #restore.
\par 
\par Save Current Position...
\par Saves your current game position, the same as entering save.
\par 
\par Select Font\'85
\par Selects the font used in the game.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Supported Formats}}}{ }{\cs16\super #{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ SupportedFormats}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Supported Formats}}}{ Supported Formats
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par On several machines (such as the Amiga) Level 9 games were distributed as an interpreter plus a data file, usually called "gamedata.dat" or something similar. These games can be played with this interpreter simply by loading the "gamedata.dat" file.

\par 
\par For the Amiga (and possibly some other formats) the v4 games were released in three parts, each in a separate data file:
\par 
\par \tab gamedat1.dat
\par \tab gamedat2.dat
\par \tab gamedat3.dat
\par 
\par Starting the first game gives a menu from which you can choose which part or game to play. For this to work the files must have the same basic structure with a number in it somewhere, e.g. file names
\par 
\par \tab TimeAndMagick1.dat
\par \tab TimeAndMagick2.dat
\par \tab TimeAndMagick3.dat
\par 
\par will work.
\par 
\par On other (especially older and smaller) computers the games were distributed a
s a single file containing both an interpreter and the game data. Level9 can cope with these files as well, as it automatically searches files for valid Level 9 games. This however requires that the file not be compressed in any way. For example, there ar
e
 several Spectrum snapshots of Level 9 games available which this interpreter can play, but these snapshots must be in an uncompressed format (e.g. SNA). Commonly snapshots are available in the compressed Z80 format, but these files can be converted to SN
A using the widely available conversion program "SPConv". Version 1.06 or higher of "SPConv" is recommended.
\par 
\par Paul David Doherty has written "L9Cut", which can extract Level 9 games from many different formats. L9Cut can also remove copy protection from Level 9 games. L9Cut can be downloaded from
\par 
\par }{\f2 \tab }{\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst {\f2  HYPERLINK ftp://ftp.gmd.de/if-archive/level9/tools/ }{\f2\fs20 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002a0000006600740070003a002f002f006600740070002e0067006d0064002e00640065002f00690066002d0061007200630068006900760065002f006c006500760065006c0039002f0074006f006f006c0073002f000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004b
a90b540000006600740070003a002f002f006600740070002e0067006d0064002e00640065002f00690066002d0061007200630068006900760065002f006c006500760065006c0039002f0074006f006f006c0073002f000000003000000000000000000000002d000000360000000000000000000000000000006f00}}
}{\fldrslt {\cs20\f2\ul\cf2 ftp://ftp.ifarchive.org/if-archive/level9/tools/}}}{\f2 
\par }{
\par This program has been tested on files obtained from releases for the Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC, C-64, Spectrum, Atari 800, BBC, Amstrad CPC, Apple 2 and MSX computers.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb60\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang2057\kerning28 {\page }{\cs16\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super $}{ Graphics}}}{ }{\cs16\super #{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super #}{ Graphics}}}{ }{\cs16\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {\cs16\super K}{ Graphics}}}{ Graphics
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f1\fs18\lang2057 {
\par The first games from Level 9 were text only, but later games included line drawn graphics. These graphics are supported by some versions of the interpreter, including the Windows version.
\par 
\par One some platforms these graphics were placed into separate files (For example, in the Amiga release of "J
ewels of Darkness" the game is in "gamedata.dat" and the graphics in "picture.dat".). In order to show the pictures the graphics file should be given the same name as the game data file, but with an extension of ".pic", ".cga" or ".hrc" (the latter two be
ing used for graphics files in MS-DOS Level 9 releases).
\par 
\par If no graphics file is specified, Level 9 will search the given game data file for graphics data. This is useful when the game data is a Spectrum SNA snapshot or a similar memory dump of an emulator.
\par 
\par Later Level 9 games used bitmap graphics. As yet these are not supported by this interpreter.
\par 
\par }}